---
title: ANS490/890 Introduction to quantitative genetics
layout: pages
permalink: /ans490f19.html
active: teaching
---

## ANS490/890 Introduction to quantitative genetics
### Fall, 2019


#### <span style="color:red">Registration</span>

To register, please sign and return this form (<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/files/ANS490-890-Huang-IntroQuantGenet-FS19.docx" target="_blank">downloadable link</a>) to Tracy Rich (richt AT anr.msu.edu, 1250 Anthony Hall, 517-353-9227). Undergraduate students should register for ANS490 (section 1) while graduate stuents should register for ANS890 (section 1).

The course has been approved to be offered as a regular course in Fall beginning 2020 (ANS404/804).

#### Description

Quantitative trait variation is pervasive in nature, it can be found among individuals in populations of virtually all life forms. For many quantitative traits, including in particular production of plants and animals, disease risks of humans, genetics contributes a significant part. Quantitative genetics is the discipline that deals with how the heritable (genetic) part of quantitative trait variation originates, dynamically changes, pass on to next generations. This is important for genetic improvement of food animals and crops, development of diagnosis and treatments of genetic diseases, and understanding evolution. 

This course covers the basics of quantitative genetics and is highly recommended for students who seek advanced and/or professional studies in genetics and employment opportunities in the breeding industry. Topics include the life cycle and properties of mutations, population parameters of genetic effects and phenotypes and their properties (means, variances, breeding values, heritability), dynamics of mutations and genetic variation (genetic drift, selection), quantitative genetics in the molecular era (mapping, prediction).

_This course covers the general principles of quantitative genetics and should be applicable across species (animals, plants, model organisms, humans, etc.)_

#### Instructor

Dr. Wen Huang   
Assistant Professor  
Department of Animal Science  
<i class="fa fa-envelope" aria-hidden="true"></i> huangw53 AT msu.edu  
<i class="fa fa-phone" aria-hidden="true"></i> (517) 353-9136  
#### Time and Location

Tu,Th 12:40-2:00 PM, Room 1240 Anthony Hall

#### Prerequisite

Students with prior preparation in genetics (molecular or quantitative, any level, e.g. ANS314) and statistics (basic statistical treatment of data, e.g. STT200) will be expected do well. However, all necessary background knowledge will be reviewed in lecture and further references will be provided.

#### Recommended Texts

- Introduction to Quantitative Genetics, Falconer and Mackay, Longman Group Ltd, 1996 (<a href="https://www.cell.com/trends/genetics/pdf/0168-9525(96)81458-2.pdf" target="_blank">book review</a>, <a href="http://catalog.lib.msu.edu/record=b3162125~S39a" target="_blank">library</a>)
- Genetics and analysis of quantitative traits, Lynch and Walsh, Sinauer, 1998 (<a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1235294/pdf/AJHGv68p548.pdf" target="_blank">book review</a>, <a href="http://catalog.lib.msu.edu/record=b3324663~S39a" target="_blank">library</a>)

Both books have a copy being reserved at the <a href="https://lib.msu.edu/contact/servicedesks/" target="_blank">Main Library</a> and can be checked out for 24 hours. The instructor also keeps a copy of of both books that you are welcome to borrow.

#### Course Objectives

The main objective is to introduce to the students theories of quantitative genetics and their applications in breeding practices. The students will be able to understand the fundamental genetic principles governing variation of quantita- tive traits in populations; explain complex genetic concepts integratively using theories and real life examples; develop quantitative and critical thinking abilities; quantitatively analyze genetic data, interpret and communicate results.

Students will meet these objectives by a) attending lectures and understanding materials; b) studying and completing homework assignments; c) participating in in-class discussion.

#### Schedule (subject to update)
| Week | Topics|
|-----:|:------|
| 1 | review of molecular genetics, Mendel’s laws, examples of genetics |
| 2 | Mendelian traits, quantitative traits, (dis)connection between them |
| 3 | review of descriptive statistics, idealized population |
| 4 | Idealized population, Wright-Fisher model |
| 5 | mutation, Hardy Weinberg Equilibrium |
| 6 | genetic drift |
| 7 | selection, inbreeding |
| 8 | Midterm, review of statistics (linear model, ANOVA) |
| 9 | allelic effects, breeding value|
|10 | partition of phenotypic variance |
|11 |heritability|
| 12 | artificial selection, breeder’s equation|
| 13 | molecular markers, technologies |
| 14 | gene mapping (linkage, association, genome-wide studies) |
| 15 | genetic prediction |

<span style="color:red">Midterm Exam: Thursday, Oct 17 12:40pm - 2:00pm in 1240 Anthony Hall (in-class), covers materials in weeks 1-6 (up to Oct 3)</span>  
<span style="color:red">Final Exam: To be determined, covers the entire semester, with emphasis on the second part</span>

#### Grading Policy

- Homework assignments: 12 weekly homework assignments, each is worth 10 points; maximum total homework points = 100 (for example, if your total homework points is 110, it will be capped at 100). Homeworks are assigned on Fridays and due the next Friday at 5 PM.
- In-class quizzes: 15 weekly quizzes, each worth 2 points; maximum total points = 25.
- In-class midterm exam: 50 points.
- Final exam: 75 points.
- Take-home project: 50 points (required for ANS890, optional for ANS490)
- Total possible points = 100 (homework) + 25 (quizzes) + 50 (midterm) + 75 (final) + [ 50 (take-home project) ] = 250 [ 300 ].

The following table determines the conversion between total points and grades.

| Total points (ANS490) | Total points (ANS890) | Grade |
|:--|:--|:--|
|>225 | 270 - 300 | 4 |
|212-224 | 255 - 269 | 3.5 |
|200-211 | 240 - 254 | 3 | 
|187-199 | 225 - 239 | 2.5 | 
|174-186 | 210 - 224 | 2 |
|162-173 | 195 - 209 | 1.5 |
|150-161 | 180 - 194 | 1 |
|<150 | < 180 |  0 |

#### Late work policy

No late work is allowed, you will get 0 points for turning in late. However, please note that you could miss 2 homework assignments and 2 in-class quizzes and still get the maximum points.

#### Academic Integrity and course policies

This course adheres to the academic integrity and other course policies as specified on the <a href="https://ombud.msu.edu/academic-integrity/index.html" target="_blank">Office of the University Ombudsperson</a> website.
