---
title: Postdoc position available
layout: pages
---

### Postdoc position available

{{ page.date | date: "%m-%d-%Y" }}

A postdoctoral position is available in molecular biology/quantitative genetics and genomics in the Department of Animal Science at Michigan State University in the laboratory of Wen Huang (https://qgg-lab.github.io). Our laboratory is broadly interested in the genetics of complex quantitative traits, using Drosophila, livestock animals, and human data as models. Laboratory approaches include classical genetics, molecular biology, genomics, statistics, and bioinformatics therefore trainees will receive training in these areas.

This advertisement invites applications from candidates with background in molecular biology/genetics. Candidates with a recent Ph.D. and experience in molecular biology or molecular genetics are strongly encouraged to apply; prior Drosophila experience is not required but a plus. Projects that can be immediately started include mapping developmental and environmental regulatory variation for translational control in early Drosophila embryos; development of massively parallel reporter assays to assess effects of regulatory variation for translation. Postdocs are also encouraged to develop projects that fit their own interest and align with directions of the lab. Candidates are encouraged to inquire and/or apply by sending current CV and a brief introduction explaining background, experience and career plan to the PI (Wen Huang: huangw53@msu.edu). References will be checked when there is mutual interest to move forward.
